1. Spark Stack contains:

A. Spark Core -- The underlying engine
B. Spark SQL -- For SQL and unstructured data processing
C. Spark Streaming -- Stream processing of the live data streams
D. MLlib -- Machine Learning algorithms
E. GraphX -- Graph processing

2. The spark core forms the vital component of spark and it is the base of Spark engine. 

It contains the basic functionalities of Spark, including task scheduling (like FCFS,round robin), memory management, fault recovery etc.

The main programming abstraction for Spark core is RDD which is its basic data abstraction.

Spark Core provides many APIs for processing structured and unstructured data.

3. Spark SQL provides integrated APIs to work with structured data.

It has a great set of APIs that allows querying data via SQL commands.

It supports various data sources like CSV, JSON, Parquet, Hive, Cassandra etc. 

4. Spark Streaming enables the processing of live streams of data.

It divides the live input data streams into batches.

For instance, logs being generated from an application server or live tweets from Twitter can be processed in near real time using Spark Streaming APIs.

5. Spark MLLib provides in-built libraries to implement ML algorithms like classification, regression, clustering, collaborative filtering.

Spark MLLib also provides various techniques for data preprocessing.

6. GraphX is a library for manipulating graphs. It provides analysis and graph computation for big data.

GraphX comes with a variety of graph algorithms and graph computations.

GraphX can be used for the disaster detection system, page ranking, financial fraud detection etc.

7. Programming Languages for spark: Python, Scala, R, Java

Libraries: Spark SQL, MLLib, GraphX, Streaming

Engine: Spark Core

Cluster Management Tools: Hadoop Yarn, Apache Mesos, Spark Scheduler

Storage tools: HDFS (Hadoop File System), Standalone Node, Cloud, RDBMS/NoSQL

8. Spark Architecture:

We need spark to understand data. So, our driver program (or drivers) consists of "SparkContext" which is used to create RDDs. For every single instance of 
spark running or spark core running, we need one SparkContext. So, one SparkContext is for every single program.

This driver program is connected with "Cluster Management" tools which is required to pull data from 
various nodes.

Now, this Cluster Manager is connected with "Worker Node" which are the endpoint of our spark
architecture where data transformed into information where we get the task done. It is having
"Executor" for cache and task in various working nodes.

Apache Spark provides a well-defined layered architecture. All Spark components and layers are loosly coupled.

A driver program runs on the master node of the Spark cluster. It schedules the job execution and negotiates with cluster manager.
It also translates RDDs into the execution graphs (consider RDDs as arrays). 
The driver program can split graphs into multiple stages.

9. The executor is a distributed agent responsible for the execution of tasks.

Every Spark application has its own executor process. An executor performs all data processing.
It reads data and writes data to external sources. It interacts with storage systems.

10. Cluster Manager is an external service responsible for acquiring resources on the Spark Cluster and allocating them to spark job.

Choosing a cluster manager for any Spark application depends on the goals of the application.

The standalone cluster manager is the easiest one to use when developing a new Spark application.

11. Cluster is used to deploy spark application and we don't need any 3rd party cluster manager.

Spark Deployment Modes: Spark Standalone, Spark on Apache Mesos, Spark on Hadoop YARN, Amazon EC2, Kubernetes.

12. Running Spark Application on YARN:

Spark preconfigured for YARN and it does not require any additional configuration to run.

YARN controls the resource management, scheduling, and security when we run Spark Applications on it.

It is possible to run an application in any mode, whether it is cluster mode (many nodes) or client mode (one single entity).

13. Cluster Deployment Mode:

The spark driver runs inside an ApplicationMaster(AM) process which is managed by YARN.
Thus, the client can go away after initializing the application.

A single process in a YARN container is responsible for driving the application and requesting resources from YARN.

14. Spark Shell:

Spark shell provides a simpler way to learn the API, as well as a powerful tool to analyze data interactively.

Spark comes with 3 types of interactive shells:

A. PySpark with Python Support
B. Spark shell with Scala Support
C. Spark R with R supports

15. Spark Web UI:

Every SparkContext launches a web UI. A web UI includes jobs, stages, storage, environment, executors.

16.

The "Jobs" tab in a web UI shows the status of all spark application (i.e. a SparkContext)

The Jobs tab consists of 2 pages: All Jobs, Details for Job

The tab displays stages per state, such as active, pending, completed, skipped or failed

17.

The "Stages" tab is created exclusively when a SparkUI is initialized.

It shows the current state of all stages.

The Stages tab includes: AllStagesPage, StagePage, PoolPage

18.

The "Storage" tab displays the information about RDDs.
The summary page in the Storage tab shows the storage levels and partition of all RDDs.
It also shows the sizes and the executors used for all partitions in an RDD.
The Storage tab includes the following pages: StoragePage, RDDPage

19.

The "Environment" tab displays the values of different environment and configuration variables.
It shows Java, Spark, and system properties. 
The Environment tab has: Parent SparkUI, AppStatusStore

20.

The "Executors" tab displays the summary information about the executors that were created for the application.
It displays memory and disk usage and task and shuffle information.

The Storage memory column in the Executors tab shows the amount of memory used and reserved for caching data
for access or near real time application.

21. PySpark Shell:

PySpark shell exposes the Spark programming model to python.
PySpark shell links the Python API to the Spark Core and initializes the SparkContext.
PySpark requires Python to be available on the system PATH and uses it to run programs.

22. Submitting a PySpark Job:

Many times our code depends on other projects or source codes, so we need to package them alongside our
application to distribute the code to a spark cluster.

For this, we create an assembly jar containing our code and its dependencies.
Both SBT and Maven have assembly plugins. When creating assembly jars, list Spark and Hadoop as provided dependencies.
Once we have an assembled jar, we can call the bin/spark-submit script while passing our jar. The spark-submit script
is used to launch application on the cluster.

23.

The following steps will help us to build our first application in spark
using python:

A. Create a document named PySparkJob.py on the local drive.
B. Open PySparkJob.py in notepad and write: print("Hello! this is pyspark") [source code]
C. We can upload the PySparkJob.py file on our CloudLab's local storage 
   if we are not using a VM and perform the following steps:

   i.   Check current directory where we have the above file, using ls.
   ii.  Run: spark-submit --master yarn --deploy-mode client PySparkJob.py
   iii. It will show the output.

24. PySpark Job using Jupyter Notebook

Write the following code in Jupyter Notebook:

from pyspark import SparkConf
from pyspark import SparkContext

conf=SparkConf()
conf.setMaster('local')
conf.setAppName('spark-basic')
sc=SparkContext(conf=conf)

def mod(x):
  import numpy as numpy
  return (x, np.mod(x,2))

rdd = sc.parallelize(range(1000).map(mod).take(10))
print(rdd)

25.








