1. First install a Python debugger extension in vscode, if it is not installed. You will see a 
debug icon (a play button) on the left sidebar. 

2. Create a main.py and calculator.py file in the same folder and write the code as mentioned. When we run pythin main.py, 
sometimes, it will give an error because we are trying to divide by zero and sometimes it will not give an error.

3. Now, click on debug icon on the left sidebar. Then click on "Run and Debug" button. Then click on
Python debugger and then select "Python File" option.

4. It will run but will not catch the error. To catch the error, we need to add breakpoints.

A breakpoint is a marker that you can set on a specific line of code in your program. When the debugger
reaches a line with a breakpoint, it will pause the execution of the program, allowing you to inspect the 
current state of the program, including variable values, memory usage, and the call stack. 

This allows you to analyze the program's behavior at that specific point and helps in identifying and 
fixing bugs or issues in the code.

5. To set a breakpoint, click on the line number in the editor and a blue dot will appear on the left side of the line. 
Now, click on the breakpoint icon to set the breakpoint.    

6. Now, when we run the program, it will pause at the breakpoint and we can inspect the current state of the program, 
including variable values, memory usage, and the call stack.

7. When we add a red dot on the line number, it means that we have set a breakpoint then application will be stopped 
at that point.

8. For our example, put a red breakpoint on the line "if value_param == 'sum':" in main.py file and then run the debugger 
after coming to the main.py file. See the values of a and b in the VARIABLES section on the left side.

If a=10 and b=0, then the program will not catch error because value_param is 'divide' and it will go to else part.

A. If we click on the continue button (play button with a line) on the top bar, it will go to the next breakpoint or end of 
the program and catch the error.

B. Suppose, after running the debugger, if we want to change the value of a or b, 
then we can do that by double clicking on the value of a or b in the VARIABLES section on the left side or 
in the debug console at the bottom. After changing the value, click on step over button (curved arrow) 
on the top bar to go to the next line. If we have to go into a function, then click on step into button (downward arrow)
on the top bar and if we have to go out of a function, then click on step out button (upward arrow) on the top bar.

To run the code line by line in a function, click on step over button (curved arrow) on the top bar and 
to go out of the function, click on step out button (upward arrow) on the top bar.

To stop the debugger, click on the red square button on the top bar.

9. to remove all breakpoints, click on the breakpoint icon with a cross on the left sidebar.

10. To add conditional breakpoints, right click on the red dot on the line number and select "Edit Breakpoint".
Then add the condition. For example, we can add condition b==0 on the breakpoint on the line "if value_param == 'sum':" 
in main.py file.Now, when we run the debugger, it will only stop at the breakpoint if the condition is met (
i.e., if b is equal to 0).

10. If the value of a variable is changing frequently, then we can add a watch on that variable.
To add a watch, go to the WATCH section on the left sidebar and click on the + icon. 
Then enter the variable name that you want to watch. Now, when we run the debugger, 
the value of the variable will be displayed in the WATCH section.

Also, we can right click on a variable in the VARIABLES section and 
select "Add to Watch" to add that variable to the WATCH section. Also, right click on a variable
and select "add to Watch" to add that variable to the WATCH section and to remove it from the WATCH section,
we can right click on the variable in the WATCH section and select "Remove Watch".

example: you can use while loop to change the value of a variable frequently and 
add a watch on that variable to see the changes.

11. To disable a breakpoint, click on the red dot on the line number and it will turn into a gray dot.

Also, we can go to bottom of the left sidebar and click on the BREAKPOINTS section to see all the breakpoints.
Then we can enable or disable a breakpoint by clicking on the checkbox next to the breakpoint.

12. A Debugger is a tool to look what is happening in your code at runtime. It helps to find and fix bugs in your code.

13. Add a breakpoint on line "nums = generate_numbers(100)" in example.py file and run the debugger.
Then, click on step into button (downward arrow) on the top bar to go into the function generate_numbers.
Then, click on step over button (curved arrow) on the top bar to run the code line by line in the function.
Then, click on step out button (upward arrow) on the top bar to go out of the function.

14. After step over to line "print("Numbers:", nums)" if we add a watch on nums variable, 
then we can see the value of nums variable in the WATCH section on the left sidebar. For example, click on 
+ icon in the WATCH section and add nums[:5] variable to see its values.

15. Now, step over to "print("Running average:", running_average(nums))" line and then step into the function 
running_average and see the call stack in the CALL STACK section on the left sidebar then step over in this function
till the line "current_avg = average(total, i + 1)" and then step into the average function and see the call stack in the
CALL STACK section on the left sidebar.



