1. Creating minimal Docker images for Python apps enhances security by reducing the attack surface, 
facilitates faster image builds, and improves overall application maintainability.

2. Built Flask application uses Flask to create a web server that listens for HTTP requests on port 5000. When a request is received:

3. 

For a POST request to /inventory, it adds a new item to the inventory.
For a GET request to /inventory/<item_id>, it retrieves the item with the specified ID from the inventory.
For a PUT request to /inventory/<item_id>, it updates the item with the specified ID in the inventory.
For a DELETE request to /inventory/<item_id>, it deletes the item with the specified ID from the inventory.

4. 

Building an image:

build the image (we use the tag full to identify that this uses the default Python image):

$ docker build -t inventory-app:full .

5.

Once the build is complete you can run the docker images command:

$ docker images
REPOSITORY      TAG                 IMAGE ID       CREATED             SIZE
inventory-app   full                4e623743f556   2 hours ago         1.02GB

6. 

You’ll see that this super simple app is about 1.12 GB in size. 
Well, this is because the base image we used the default Python 3.11 image has a 
large number of Debian packages and is about 1.01 GB in size. So we need to find a smaller base image.

Well, here are the options:

A. python:version-alpine images are based on Alpine Linux and will give you the smallest final image. 
But you need to be able to install packages as well, yes? But that’s a challenge with alpine images.
B. python:version-slim comes with the minimal number of Debian packages needed to run Python. 
And you’ll (almost always) be able to install most required Python packages with pip.

7. 

So your base image should be small. But not too small that you face compatibility issues and 
wrap your head around installing dependencies (quite common for Python applications). 
That’s why we’ll use the python:3.11-slim base image in the next step and build our image.

8. 

Let’s build the image (tagged slim):

$ docker build -t inventory-app:slim .
 

The python:3.11-slim base image is of size 131 MB. And the inventory-app:slim image is around 146 MB which is much smaller than the 1.02GB image we had earlier:

$ docker images
REPOSITORY      TAG                 IMAGE ID       CREATED             SIZE
inventory-app   slim                32784c60a992   About an hour ago   146MB
inventory-app   full                4e623743f556   2 hours ago         1.02GB
 

9. You can also use multi-stage builds to make the final image smaller. 

