Box and I type terminal, and this terminal came up. Pwd is a print
working directory. This is effectively the same
user interface as Linux, and most servers are
done with Linux. Our goal is to install a Python. The first thing to do is to check to see if
you've already gotten stalled because you can type
the command python dash, dash version and see
that we have Python 2.7. Now if you actually
just say Python, you'll go into the
shell and you'll get some really bad warnings
because Python 2, as of the recording
of this moment is actually out of support. If you ever get into this
triple Chevron prompt, you just say quit, close paren, and that
will get you out of it. Because macOS used Python, let me do a clear here. Because Python is used inside macOS and
they use Python 2, we tend to have to
install our own copy of Python and it will
show up as Python 3. Now if you just type
Python 3 minus, minus version and you
already have a python, then don't bother installing it. I don't want to install the developer tools so I'm just going to say
Cancel right here. It might be part of that, but I just rather install the official Python
distribution. We're going to go to python.org and click on ''Downloads''. It knows, it's already figured
out that on my Mac so I'm going to download Python 3.11. You just download the
latest one, you'll be fine. That download is now completed. Going to open it up and click on it and we're going to go
continue, continue, continue. I agree. Now it's installing. It's showing me a folder
with Python in it. I'm going to click ''Close''
my downloads and so it seems to be installed. We'll go ahead and move the
installer to the trash. Then I'm going to come over
here and I'm going to start python 3 minus, minus version. Let's close this and
open terminal again. Python 3 minus, minus version. There we go. You
notice I had to close my terminal and open
it again because this shell needed to see the new software so
you can do that. You won't have to do that again. There's a command you
can type that might fix that by just say rehash. That says, look, those doesn't even have it so I'm wrong there. But eventually you wanted to see Python 3 minus, minus version. Away we go so you have
Python installed. The next problem you need is you need a programmer editor. You don't want to use TextEdit. Mac comes with this
thing called TextEdit, don't use this because it
saves in a weird format called RTF so don't use
TextEdit, just don't use it. You've got to find a
programmer editor. If we take a look at
Python for everybody, we have this page
called editors. Now the best editor depends, you may already have an editor. If you have an editor, keep it. We have a couple of
recommendations, brackets, which is a super
simple one VS Code, which is really nice, but the installation
can be a little tricky. For Beginners, I'm just
going to recommend brackets. But if you have one, you like one you like Sublime, over the years that we've
been teaching this course, there's just been so many editors that
have come and gone. I probably should put a
little thing on here that says all the editors that
we don't use anymore, or all the recommended
editors that we don't use. Brackets io is for now, I like it, it's open
source, it's free, it looks to me like
it's going to stay free and open source and
it works on Windows, Mac, and Linux and
so I like that, so I'm going to download that. We're going to open it. Just click on here, open it. Here is the bracket
GitHub, which is nice. I'm just copying it from the brackets code into my
application folder and the applications is
where on the Mac you put things that
are going to be run. Now I'm going to
just close this. I've got a couple of
things on my desktop here. That's the brackets mount point. Now to run brackets, I'm going to go up to
my search and type brackets and click brackets. I'll go ahead and
hide this page. Yes, it's wanting to make sure I'm not installing
some bad stuff. Here we have brackets. It's a nice simple
editor and it starts up. I'm going to close this window and I am going
to create a new file. I'm going to say print "hello world" then I'm going
to save this file. One thing that you're
going to have to keep track of is where you're at. Users admin, this desktop
is in user's admin desktop, so I'm going to change
directory into desktop, pwd print working directory so you see in user's admin desktop. I'm going to make a
directory mkdir py4e. Then I'm going to change
into that directory. Like I said, it's
a good thing for you to learn all these things. Now I'm in the folder py4e. If I look on my desktop, I've got this folder py4e that currently has
nothing in it. This terminal and this
folder are the same thing. Now I'm going to File, Save As and I'm going to
go into my desktop and go into py4e and I'm going to call this file hello.py and
I'm going to save it. Now at this point it knows
it as Python file and brackets knows what Python
syntax highlighting is, so that's quite nice. If I look in py4e, I see there is a file. If I look in it in terminal, and I say ls minus l, I see that final as well. To run that file, I
say python3, hello.py. With that, I have created
my first Python program, I've installed a text editor, I've installed Python and
created my first program. I hope that you
found this useful. See you in the rest
of the course.