Welcome to this week. Last week we talked about the theory of programming and
computer science and the Macarena and all that
stuff, and that's cool. But now we're going to
start writing programming, writing programs using Python. One of the things we're trying
to encourage you to do is install Python and run
it because sooner or later you are going
to have to do that. You're going to have to
install it and run it. We've got a bunch of videos. But in Courses 1 and Courses 2 you don't actually
have to do that. Now we know that some
people are using iPads or Chromebooks, something else, and you
can't install Python. Maybe you're a school
that can install Python, so it's great that you can write Python programs using software we've provided in the browser, and we have this
Python Playground. As you go through the course, you'll find assignments
that you have to do. But what this is, is this is an ungraded assignment;
Python Code Playground. It's launched externally using a technology called Learning
Tools Interoperability. It's going to pop this
open in a new tab, so you see that
it's in a new tab, and it's the Python Playground. Now this is like the Autograder, except it has no
expectations and you can write any
code that you want. Let me hit the
"Reset Code" button. You can always go back to the default code and this is the code that's there for you. If I want to run it, I can just say go ahead
and run this code. The code runs and the
output is over here. It actually ran the Python and the code came out over here. Now this is a file, this is like Chapter 7, it's even from Course 2, so the default code here is probably not what
you want to play with. You can play with
something like print play! , and run that. It runs the code, and then
your output comes here. Now there are three files, which is later, Chapter 7
and later, that you can use. These are the sample files that we use throughout a lot of the assignments in the
book, and away you go. You can do whatever
you want here. It's not being graded, there's no grade being
sent back to Coursera, and so away you go. If you're writing Python on
your laptop or your computer, you're way better to just
learn how to do Python there and then paste the code
into the Autograders later. But if you have no
access whatsoever, that's why we give you
the Python Playground. Now the other thing
that's cool about this is that this
view student code, allows our teaching staff to
take a look at your code. We don't allow you to paste
code into the forums. What you can do is you can
ask for help in the forums, and the teaching staff can go in and view the student code, type in your name or email, and then find the code
that you last put in. You can put something in here
and get some help on it. The teaching assistant
can see your entire code, they can run your code, they can do all kinds of things, and so it's a great way to communicate with the
teaching assistant. You leave your code
in the Playground, you ask the teaching assistant, and then they go take a look at your code and
give you some answers. When you're all done,
you simply press "Done", and we're back to Week 2. But like I said, I really
would personally prefer that you build the
skills in running Python on your laptop
as quick as possible. But if that's not
practical for you, then that's why we have
the Python Playground here in Courses 1 and 2.